As a new leader, a weekly status report is one of the few possibilities,
besides meeting attendance I guess,
to demonstrate team contributions to management or customers.
So the intent and reason for status reports is to inform your customer,
stakeholder, your new manager, new teammates,
on the progress of a project or activities.
Okay.
So what do we want to do in that status report?
Are we doing the right things?
The right things meaning,
are we doing the things within the scope of our responsibility?
Are we doing things right?
In other words, is there quality to what we do?
Timeliness?
Schedule?
Are we meeting milestones?
And also a little more fuzzy here is, are we showing dedication to the project,
to the customer and to the company?
Are we really behind the project?
Are we showing there's a sense of urgency and dedication to what we're doing?
Also,
by constantly developing his or her knowledge and skills
that the business needs to be successful as well as to your
own long-term career prospects.
Another thing we like to show in the status report is that,
are we developing our knowledge and skills,
that is our team, that the business needs to be successful?
In other words, are the things we're doing,
not just the work-related things but we're also learning and
exploring other things that would contribute to those projects
and contribute to the company as well as contribute to your
long-term career prospects as well.
Here's a tip.
Management loves status reports.
Remember,
management is not in the trenches and needs timely
information to make informed decisions and also,
in my opinion, in business no news is in fact bad news.
Management wants to know that you are doing
something and without a status report,
sometimes they may have doubts just about what's going on.
So it's critical to provide those timely status
reports of your team's activities.
To whom do you send your status reports?
For me, there are three main types of status report recipients.
The first is the customers.
You're doing work for customers.
The second is your management.
It might be your direct report,
it might be some other management up the chain or across the chain.
And the third for me is the team, the team itself.
You're going to want to inform your team as well.
Okay, back to the first.
Customers.
The lack of a project status report is usually interpreted as either
something is wrong or you don't know what is going on.
You do not want that impression of you or your team.
In fact,
you're consistent status reports following the 5 C's will support a positive,
perceptional perception of you by your customers.
So constantly status your customers; never miss a one.
You want to be professional and consistent per project.
You're on three projects?
You will have three different status reports going
to each of those three customers.
Next, management.
Status your management.
You want to be consistent.
I also suggest copying your management on all status
reports going to your customers as well.
He or she will also see the progress and quality of your work,
so to your management, it's still very professional,
it's consistent, but it will be project summaries.
So if each week you send out three status reports to your three key customers,
your status report to your manager will have the summary of those,
but also when you send out your weekly status reports to your customers,
I would also suggest that you cc or copy your manager.
The third, this is your team.
You need to status your team.
Now I look at this as a little more of informal statuses,
maybe a little more casual and company focused.
They're already on the projects; they may know exactly what's going on in the
projects because you may have asked them for their input,
but you may want to keep them informed about broader activities,
maybe something new out of HR,
maybe a new policy coming up on raises and promotions and things like that.
So I see these as more informal, casual,
company focused; weekly, bi-weekly, however you choose to do it.
Maybe you'll use a stand-up form for this as well.
And of course, in all the communiqué that you're going to do,
always follow the 5 C's. Now let's actually look at the structure of a status report.